# macro_rules!

macro_rules! is a syntax extension (it is technically not part of rust's syntax). 

`macro_rules!` uses the following forms (for some number of rules: N)

```rust
macro_rules! $name {
	$rule0;
	$rule1;
	// ...
	$ruleN;
}
```

There must be at least one rule and the semicolon is optional after the last rule. Additionally, you can use brackets(`[]`), parentheses(`()`) or braces(`{}`).

## rules

Each rules looks like this:

```
  ($matcher) => {$expansion}
```

Like before, the kind of parentheses does not really matter; however, parantheses around the mathcer and braces around the expansion is the convention.

> The expansion part of the rule is also called its transcriber

# matching

When a MBE macro is invoked, the `macro_rules!` interpreter goes through each rule (one by one, in order of declaration). It tries to match the content of the inputs token tree against that rules matcher. The matcher must match the entire input to be considered a match.

If an input matches the matcher, the invocation is replaced by the expansion; otherwise, the next "arm" is tried. If all rules/arms fail to match, the expansion fails with an error.

## simple example matcher

The simplest matcher is an empty matcher, which only matches if the input is also empty (like in `four!() or vec![]`).

```rust
macro_rules! four {
    () => { 1 + 3 };
}
```

Notice that the grouping tokens (`()`, `[]`, and `{}`) are not matched. They are not even passed to the invocation. You could call `four![]` and it would match! Only the contents of the input token tree are considered.

## literal token tree matcher

Matchers can also contain literal token trees. These must be matched exactly. You just write the token tree normally for example:

```
// no syntax highlights bcuz it goes crazy
macro_rules! trash {
	( 444 fn 666 ['iamhungryasf "poop] @_@ ) => {println!("what the fuck!");}
}
```

Would only ever match `trash!( 444 fn 666 ['iamhungryasf "poop] @_@ )`. Which is hilarious.  Any token tree you can write, you can use.

# Metavariables

Matchers can also contain captures, which allow input to be matched/filtered based on some grammar catagory. The matched value can be captured into a metavariable which can be substituted into the output.

## capture syntax

In the matcher, a capture looks like a `$` followed by an identifier (the name of the meta varible) followed by a `:` followed by a fragment specifier. Here are the following legal fragment specifiers:

-   [`block`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#block): a block (i.e. a block of statements and/or an expression, surrounded by braces)
-   [`expr`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#expr): an expression
-   [`ident`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#ident): an identifier (this includes keywords)
-   [`item`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#item): an item, like a function, struct, module, impl, etc.
-   [`lifetime`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#lifetime): a lifetime (e.g. `'foo`, `'static`, ...)
-   [`literal`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#literal): a literal (e.g. `"Hello World!"`, `3.14`, `'🦀'`, ...)
-   [`meta`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#meta): a meta item; the things that go inside the `#[...]` and `#![...]` attributes
-   [`pat`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#pat): a pattern
-   [`path`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#path): a path (e.g. `foo`, `::std::mem::replace`, `transmute::<_, int>`, …)
-   [`stmt`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#stmt): a statement
-   [`tt`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#tt): a single token tree
-   [`ty`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#ty): a type
-   [`vis`](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/decl-macros/minutiae/fragment-specifiers.html#vis): a possible empty visibility qualifier (e.g. `pub`, `pub(in crate)`, ...)

Here is an example 
```rust
macro_rules! capture_expr {
	($e:expr) => { 5 * $e }
}
```

Notice we use `$` whenever refering to the metavariable.

> These metavariable can use rusts compiler to ensure that whatever value is captured is 100% valid. `literal`s will always be literals and `pat`s will always be patterns.

We can have several metavariable in one matcher:

```rust
macro_rules! many_args {
	($a:expr, $b:expr, $c:expr) => { $a * ($b + $c) };
}
```

Also, once a metavariable is captured, you can use it as often or as little as you would like in the expansion:

```rust
macro_rules! discard {
    ($e:expr) => {};
}
macro_rules! repeat {
    ($e:expr) => { $e; $e; $e; };
}
```

> There is a special metavariable called `$crate`, which can be used to refer to the current crate.

# Repetitions

Matchers can contain repetitions. These allow sequences of tokens to be matched. Repetitions have the general form `$ ( ... ) sep rep` where:

- `$` is the literal token "$"
- `( ... )` is the paren-grouped matcher being repeated. For example `($e:expr)`.
- `sep` is an optional seperation token. It may not be a delimiter or one of the repetition oporators. `,` and `;` are examples.
- `rep` is the **required** repeat oporator. Currently, there are only three options for this: ^6b3ca2
	- `?`: meaning at most one repetition
	- `*`: meaning 0 or more repetitions
	- `+`: meaning 1 or more repetitions

> `?` cannot be used with a sep oporator becuase it implies that there is at most one occurrence.

Repetitions can contain any other valid matcher, including literal token trees, metavariables, and other repetitions.

Repetitions use the same syntax in the expansion and the contained, repeated metavariables can only be accessed inside of repetitions in the expansion.

## example

Heres an example which matches zero or more comma seperated expresions, formats them to a string, and then returns a vector of those strings. 

```rust
macro_rules! vec_strs {
    (
        // Start a repetition:
        $(
            // Each repeat must contain an expression...
            $element:expr
        )
        // ...separated by commas...
        ,
        // ...zero or more times.
        *
    ) => {
        // Enclose the expansion in a block so that we can use
        // multiple statements.
        {
            let mut v = Vec::new();

            // Start a repetition:
            $(
                // Each repeat will contain the following statement, with
                // $element replaced with the corresponding expression.
                v.push(format!("{}", $element));
            )*

            v
        }
    };
}

fn main() {
    let s = vec_strs![1, "a", true, 3.14159f32];
    assert_eq!(s, &["1", "a", "true", "3.14159"]);
}
```

Also, you can repeat multiple metavariables in a single repetition as long as the metavariables reapeat equally often. Heres an example of that:

```rust
macro_rules! repeat_two {
    ($($i:ident)*, $($i2:ident)*) => {
        $(let $i: (); let $i2: (); )*
    }
}

fn main() {
    repeat_two!(a b c d e f, g h i j k l);
}
```

Think of this as saying: there will be 0 or more `ident`s, then there will be a comma and a space, then there will be 0 or more `ident`s.

This code examples to this:

```rust
#![feature(prelude_import)]
#[prelude_import]
use std::prelude::rust_2021::*;
#[macro_use]
extern crate std;
macro_rules! repeat_two {
    ($($i : ident) *, $($i2 : ident) *) =>
    { $(let $i : () ; let $i2 : () ;) * }
}

fn main() {
    let a: ();
    let g: ();
    let b: ();
    let h: ();
    let c: ();
    let i: ();
    let d: ();
    let j: ();
    let e: ();
    let k: ();
    let f: ();
    let l: ();
}
```

Notice the order in which the expansion placed the identifiers: 
- a, g, b, h 
- first before comma, first after comma, second before comma, second after comma, etc

This would not work if there were a different number of idents before and after the comma.

# metavariable expresions

In the expansion/transcriber, you can use metavariable expresions. They provide transcribers with information about metavariable that is otherwise annoying as hell to obtain. Excluding the `$$` expresion, all metavariable expresions have the form `${op(...)}`. As of right now, all metavariable expresions except `$$` deal with repetitions.

The following expressions are available with `ident` being the name of a bound metavariable and `depth` being an integer literal:

-   `${count(ident)}`: The number of times `$ident` repeats in the inner-most repetition in total. This is equivalent to `${count(ident, 0)}`.
-   `${count(ident, depth)}`: The number of times `$ident` repeats in the repetition at `depth`.
-   `${index()}`: The current repetition index of the inner-most repetition. This is equivalent to `${index(0)}`.
-   `${index(depth)}`: The current index of the repetition at `depth`, counting outwards.
-   `${length()}`: The number of times the inner-most repetition will repeat for. This is equivalent to `${length(0)}`.
-   `${length(depth)}`: The number of times the repetition at `depth` will repeat for, counting outwards.
-   `${ignore(ident)}`: Binds `$ident` for repetition, while expanding to nothing.
-   `$$`: Expands to a single `$`, effectively escaping the `$` token so it won't be transcribed.

> I don't really get this shit but it seems useful for counting repetitions (maybe you could expand the [[#^6b3ca2|rep]] oporators from just `+`, `*`, and `?` to to others as well?)