
# Invoking a macro with syntax expansions

Since macros are proccesed after constriction of the [[1.1 Source Analysis#Parsing|AST]], the syntax used to invoke macros must be part of the languages syntax. There are four syntax expansions used to invoke macros:

1.  `# [ arg ]`; _e.g._ `#[derive(Clone)]`, `#[no_mangle]`, …
2.  `# ! [ $arg ]`; _e.g._ `#![allow(dead_code)]`, `#![crate_name="blang"]`, …
3.  `$name ! $arg`; _e.g._ `println!("Hi!")`, `concat!("a", "b")`, …
4.  `$name ! $arg0 $arg1`; _e.g._ `macro_rules! dummy { () => {}; }`.

## \#1 and \#2

Items 1 and 2 are attributes which annotate/decorate items, expresions, and statements.
There are three kinds of attributes 

1. bulit-in attributes
2. proc-macro attributes
3. derive attributes

> You can use procedural macros to create custom proc-macro and derive attributes. On the other hand, built in attributes are implemented by the compiler.

## \#3

The third item covers function-like macros. You can use this form of syntax with `macro_rules!`, `macro`, and also procedural macros.

> Note that this syntax is not limited to `macro_rules!` macros. For example, `format!` is a `macro_rules!` macro but `format_args!` is not (it is a compiler built-in)

## \#4

The fourth item is not available to macros at all (what!!!). It is only used by the `macro_rules!` syntax. `macro_rules!` are the only ones which can take in a variable number of args (hence, they use the weird match thing).

# in short,

-   There are multiple kinds of syntax extensions in Rust.
-   Just seeing something of the form `$name! $arg`, doesn't tell you what kind of syntax extension it might be. It could be a `macro_rules!` macro, a `proc-macro` or maybe even a builtin.
-   The input to every `!` macro invocation, that is form 3, is a single non-leaf token tree.
-   Syntax extensions are parsed as _part_ of the abstract syntax tree.

# you can

use syntax expansions in 
-   Patterns
-   Statements
-   Expressions
-   Items(this includes `impl` items)
-   Types

# you cannot

use syntax expansions in 
-   Identifiers - naming things
-   Match arms - as these are both a pattern and a statement/expression
-   Struct fields - includes an identifier