Hygien is the concept that macros which use syntax extensions (that is, **all macros!**) should be able to work in their own context. That is, macros should not affect of be affected by the code which surrounds them.

Not all syntax extensions in rust are perfectly hygienic.

# where? when?

Hygiene usually only affects identifiers and paths emmitted by syntax extensions.

> Hygiene mainly affects identifiers and paths emitted by syntax extensions. In short, if an identifier created by a syntax extension cannot be accessed by the environment where the syntax extension has been invoked it is hygienic in regards to that identifier. Likewise, if an identifier used in a syntax extension cannot reference something defined outside of a syntax extension it is considered hygienic.

But what the fuck does that even mean!!!?

## heres an unhygienic example

Lets assumes we have some syntax extension (i.e. some macro) named `create_literal` that expands to `let literal = 69420;`. Given the following code:

```rust
make_literal!();
assert_eq!(literal, 69420);
```

If the `literal` identifier in the call to `assert_eq` resolves to 69420 as we defined above, the macro is **NOT** hygienic: it creates an identifier used by its surrounding enviroment.

## another unhygienic example

Assume we have another, similiar, syntax extension (macro) called `use_literal` that expands to `literal = 69420;`. Given the following code:

```rust
let mut literal = 0;
use_literal!();
```

The `use_literal!` syntax extension (macro) here is also unhygienic as is uses an identifier defined before its invocation. 

### What happened in both examples

In both examples, a macro either created an identifier used later in the code without explicitly stating so. Or used an identifier defined earlier in the code without explicitly stating so. 

Notice how this is different from, say, the `vec!` syntax extension provided by rust's standard library. It would be strange, unintuitive, and unhygienic if calling `vec![1, 2, 3];` expanded to something like:

```rust
let result_vec = {
	let mut temp_vec = vec::new();
	temp_vec.push(1);
	temp_vec.push(2);
	temp_vec.push(3);

	temp_vec
}
```

or
```rust
let mut result_vec = vec::new();
temp_vec.push(1);
temp_vec.push(2);
temp_vec.push(3);
```

Bluntly, this would suck to work with. Users of the `vec!` macro would have no way to name the vector they wanted to create and they could not set its mutability!